This is Tuesday, March 23, 1976. I'm Mark Burnett,
and I'm working on an oral history project for Dr.
Kimber's cultural geography class. I'm talking
with Mr. Harry L. Kidd, Jr. Mr. Kidd is an associate
professor of English and the assistant dean of the
graduate college at Texas A&M University. Mr.
Kidd, I guess we'll start out you telling us a
little bit about your background. All right, I'll
be happy to, Mr. Burnett. I'm of German, Welsh, and
Italian stock. My grandfather on my mother's side
was descended from one of the Hessian soldiers of
the American Revolution who remained in the
United States after the Revolution. My
grandfather's name was J.W.W. Schuller, and he
was a mountain circuit rider. in the southwestern
part of the state of Virginia. He was a Methodist
circuit rider, and he and his entire family were
devoted Methodists. Two of his sons were
Methodist preachers, and one was rather noted
during the so-called Roaring Twenties as
Fightin' Bob Shuler, who was a famous West Coast
evangelist and who was constantly in the
newspapers for his attacks. on sand and the devil,
and I think also on Amy Semple McPherson, who was a
rival evangelist lady at the time. My father's
people were early settlers in Virginia. They were
of Welsh stock, and they settled in the little town
of Lovingston, Virginia, which is not far from
Charlottesville. My grandfather Kidd, his name
was Edward Kidd, was clerk of the court there in
Lovingston for many years. My father was a law
graduate of Washington Lee University in
Virginia. One of his brothers was a VMI graduate,
and the other was a University of Virginia
graduate. And you can well imagine that there was a
good old football rivalry up in that part of the
woods. Sometimes it was said the kid boys couldn't
stay in the same house with each other during the
fall football season. I myself was born in a small
mountain town in southwest Virginia, a little
town called Lebanon, Virginia. It was the county
seat of Russell County. My father at that time was a
young lawyer. He was a partner in a very old law firm
specializing in corporation law. Lebanon was, I
thought, a very beautiful little town. I loved it
very much. It was a mountain town completely
surrounded by mountains on all sides with springs
coming out of the sides of the mountains and all
beautiful rhododendrons and flowers of all sorts
on the sides of the mountain in the springs. And
there were caves in virtually every small hill and
mountain where little boys who liked a little
adventure in danger could play. And there was some
danger. But of course, our parents didn't find out
that we'd been in some of these caves until we got
home again and we had trouble. My family was
composed of my father and mother, myself, and Ed
Kidd, my younger brother. Ed was named after my
grandfather, Edward Kidd. Ed now lives in Mahea,
Texas. He is retired having had a serious illness a
few years ago. I went to school in Lebanon. It was an
interesting school. It was a small mountain
school in which for the first few grades, several
grades were taught in one room. I don't remember
now all these years later too much about my early
school experiences. I do remember that we had
chapel every day and we had a very traditional, I
suppose, conservative American-type chapel of
the 20s in these small schools. We all filed in. In
fact, we marched in the chapel. Everyone in the
school marched in the chapel and took seats in the
same places every morning. We had prayers led by
the school superintendent, something that
wouldn't be allowed now. And we sang various
songs. I can remember such songs as America the
Beautiful, when the corn is waving any deer, and
other songs that all of us really enjoyed singing.
Generally, either the school superintendent or
some prominent person in town would give us a
little inspirational talk. There would be
announcements made about the work of the day, and
then we'd all go back to our rooms and work. I
enjoyed my school life there. It was pleasant. It
was a small town. I had a number of good playmates.
In the wintertime, snow was on the ground from
about October until March. We could go up into the
sides of the mountains and take our little flying
arrow sleds and slide down the mountains. I well
recall trying my sled out in an early autumn snow.
And the snow was just fine for sledding, but there
was a little brook at the bottom of the mountain
that I'd forgot about. And I was just flying down
the side of the hill and suddenly realized that
there it was. And it had not frozen over, and there
was nothing to do. I just stayed with the sled. sled
and I went into about four feet of icy cold water,
and that ended my sledding for the day. We had lots
of fun in the summertime. My aunts and uncles who
also lived around the town there had cherry trees
and fruit trees of various kinds. I spent a good
deal of time sitting up in cherry trees, making
myself sick with cherries. In the fall and autumn,
we had apple trees of various kinds in our own
backyard. I well remember the cider making
operations that we used to involve ourselves in
and the way the bees and wasps would get drunk on the
cider and crawl around and fall into the cider and
have to be strained out. We had various things in
the yard there. We had a garden, which I didn't care
too much for because I had to do a little work in it
that I didn't much want to do. I raised ducks and
turkeys and rabbits and so forth, and there they
were mainly pets, and I felt bad when we ate one,
though I ate my share nevertheless. So all in all,
life in this little mountain town was very
pleasant for me and for my family and for all those
people. I knew there it was a small and fairly
prosperous town. It was not far from the coal mine
area, but it wasn't a coal town. Basically, it was a
farming town and a tobacco town. It was also the
county seat. And all of the trials of the county
were there. And it was the headquarters for most of
the lawyers of the area. At age 12, when I was 12, my
father's health became bad. And he was advised to
move to a climate that was somewhat warmer in the
wintertime. And because we had relatives in
Texas, my grandfather, Schuller, having left the
Holston Conference sometime before and having
joined the Central Texas Conference as a
Methodist preacher, we decided to try Texas. And
my father came to Texas first, and after a year sent
for us, and he had settled in Mejia, Texas in
Limestone County. I was 12 years old when we came to
Mejia. My brother was three and a half years
younger. It seemed to me that the transition from
life in the little mountain town of Lebanon to life
in my head was perhaps harder on me than it was on
anybody else, at least I felt that way about it. I
was leaving all my friends, I was leaving my
baseball team and my buddies, and I didn't know
anybody. It was a completely new area, new school,
new state, new type of people. I just felt totally
out of place and miserable there in my head when I
came there. At the time, that I moved there in 1927,
Mahale was a dying oil town. It had at one time been
the largest oil field in the world.
Mahale-Wortham Field combination was the
biggest oil field in the world. Produced more oil
than any other known oil field up to that time. But
the field was dying, the companies were pulling
out, some of the rigs were left, and they were
pumping. And I well remember the first few nights
that I slept in our new house that my father had
built for us there in Maham. I kept hearing this
steady drumming sound and I didn't know what it
was. There wasn't anything like that up in the
mountains where I'd come from. And I, after some
days, possibly even weeks, when the sound just
filled the air at night and you could still hear it
in the daytime, I got upnerved enough to ask
somebody what it was. And it turned out to be the
pumping of the the rigs out in the field five or six
miles from Mahea. At night you could hear this
sound for miles and it was very distracting to
someone who was not used to it. In time I got used to
it, paid no attention to it at all, but it was
interesting.
My father's health problems had pretty well
strapped the family financially and We had barely
got well settled in Mahea until the Great
Depression hit. And this was, of course, a very bad
economic time for everybody, including lawyers
in the new area. There wasn't much money coming in.
And I thought that I ought to find work and make what
I could. So I suppose I was perhaps 14 or 15 when,
maybe a little earlier, when I first started
taking every known job that I could get paid money.
I did all sorts of things. mowed yards, chopped
cotton, which was a rather difficult job and paid
fairly well, but it was a very grueling job. I
picked cotton. I well recall picking cotton for a
dollar a hundred for a full summer. and it takes a
whole lot of cotton to in a week's time at a dollar a
hundred to bring your paycheck up to fifteen or
twenty dollars you're you're working from dawn to
dark but I really enjoyed cotton picking perhaps
more than any other job that I did because there was
a friendship and a camaraderie among the pickers
the black and white working together we told
stories swapped yarns as we moved down the rows and
the fast pickers were very kind they'd help me,
teach me how to pick a little more, a little faster,
and at lunchtime we'd pull our cotton sacks up
under the wagon out of the sun and eat our
sandwiches or lunches and crack a coke if we had one
and generally enjoy ourselves. It was hard work
but it was in a way very rewarding work and I enjoyed
the summers that I spent, two or three of them,
picking cotton. Meantime, of course, I was back in
the small domestic livestock business there at
home. I had two milk cows of my own and sold milk in
the neighborhood and I raised rabbits which I
dressed and had a good market for both the furs
which I shipped off and the meat to restaurants
there in town. I had a very regular killing
schedule and delivery schedule and made pretty
good money out of the rabbits and pigeons and other
things that I had. I never would work with anything
or handle any type of livestock that I could not
make pay for itself because I simply couldn't
afford to. And I suppose I was rather, what shall I
say, I was tight with a dollar then. I still am to
some extent because these hard times made me feel
that money was a very valuable commodity if you
could get it some way or other. I enjoyed my school
life after I got to high school. I was out of place
pretty much the first year or two in the last two
grades of elementary school, simply because I
didn't know anybody. But in a couple of years, I
managed to get on the softball team there. And I
began to take up tennis and proved to be quite a good
tennis player. And so by the time I got into high
school, which was only three years in those days, I
had a number of friends, both boys and girls, and
people to play with. And I was on the softball team,
and I was both the singles player and on the doubles
team for the high school in tennis for three
consecutive years. Twice I went to state meet. I
didn't win anything, but at least I did. get by the
district and got to state meet and had the fun of
going and so on. I was also on the high school
debating team, which gave me a number of bad speech
habits which I never was able to overcome, one of
which was, of course, talking much too fast under
any sort of pressure situation in order to be able
to make all the points I felt that I had to make as a
debater. However, my partner and I, Sam was my
partner. He and I were very successful debaters
for a couple of years. And we also went to state meet
and debate. And I recall at one of the state meets, I
was in the unfortunate situation of having an
important debate called at the same time a tennis
match was called. The only thing I could do was
forfeit one of them, and I chose to forfeit the
tennis match because I felt we might have a better
chance in debate. We lost the debate match, but I
think I would have also lost the tennis match, so I
really didn't lose very much. I graduated from
high school in 1932 and had managed to save up
enough money from my summer's work and also from a
newspaper route that I had carried for several
years there in Mahea and from the profits from my
small livestock operations to at least see my way
to one year and possibly two of college or
university. I wanted to go to Washington Lee,
where my father had gone, and study law. But this
seemed out of the question, because it was a long
way away, and the tuition costs and so forth in
those days were comparatively high as compared to
the local schools in Texas. So in the end, I did what
many other people did. Mr. Burnett, who is sitting
here and looking rather questioning, is a Texas
Aggie, and I rather hate to tell him that I decided
to opt to go to the University of Texas at Austin.
This I did. I went down to the University of Texas
and I went early with the idea that perhaps if I went
a little early in the fall I could find a job
somewhere in Austin and make my money go a little
further. Well, I was very lucky. I hadn't been in
Austin very long at the university I was over at the
in front of the registrar's office one day when a
lady came in from down in the valley somewhere I
just remember now just where she was from but she
was a very nice lady and she was bringing her son to
put him in school at Austin as a freshman he too was
going to be a freshman and I had been there a few days
and knew where things were so I just happened to
meet the son and talking to him. He didn't know
where to go, so I volunteered to show him and his
mother around for half a day. After I had done this
for about four hours, I was getting along very well
with both the boy and his mother. They were very,
very nice people. They seemed to like me, and I
certainly liked them. She asked me if I'd have
lunch with them, and I was happy to do this. And
while at lunch, she asked me if I would like to work
for her. She was going to open a boy's boarding
house. She already had the boarding house there.
And she was going to open this boarding house. And
my job was to be to try to recruit students who came
to the university to live in the boarding house and
then sort of help her manage the house after it was
full. For this, I was to get a room and my meals. This
sounded very good to me, and I accepted the job with
gratitude. and managed to do this. In fact, in
about ten days I had the room full of students, the
house full of students. Most of them were freshmen
and they had made their deposits and Mrs. Jones,
who was the lady, was very, very happy and I was
happy and I did, in fact, work for her for a couple of
years there. So I got off to a good start in my life at
college. I had not thought too much about what I'd
like to major in, but had changed my mind from
thinking about law largely at my father's
urgings. He had not been happy in the legal
business, although he had made a good deal of money
in Virginia, but he had never really liked the law,
I think, and he kept insisting that this was not a
good profession for me to follow, though I thought
really that it was, and I still think perhaps I
might have made a good lawyer. In any case, I
decided that I would study chemical engineering.
I think the reason was that some of the engineering
older students at Texas wore boots and little
riding pants tucked into their boots, and they
looked very virile and masculine and experienced
and worldly, and I thought, my, it would be nice to
be an engineer. Perhaps I, too, would be an
engineer. So I majored in chemical engineering,
or at least declared for it. I did fairly well in the
coursework the first year, but I was not
particularly interested in it. And I disliked
mechanical drawing or drafting very much indeed.
I had a teacher, unfortunately, who taught me
something that I've thought about many years in my
own teaching experience. He had absolutely no
patience with my early efforts, and I had a slight
tremor in my right hand, and I couldn't join the
lines as accurately as he would like for me to join
him. I could read blueprints and was good enough in
theory, but I simply could not draw very well. And
he would come up in front of the class and take my
drawings and make all manner of fun of them and
criticize them and tell me I could never be an
engineer. So after a while, I rather decided
whether I could be an engineer or not. If this was an
engineer, I didn't want to be one. And so I gave up
the engineering profession and switched than to
mathematics, in which I had done quite well. I
stayed with mathematics a while. And then in my
third year, and I, of course, was working through
the summers, it looked as though I might graduate
someday in mathematics. I had also taken a number
of education courses so that I might be qualified
to teach if I chose to do so, though I had for a time
thought of working as a mathematician for an oil
company or perhaps an actuarial service for an
insurance company, something of this sort. In any
case, meantime I had met the girl that I was going to
marry. there in Texas. She was a Miss Minnie Lee
Canterbury of Clarksville, Texas which is one of
the oldest towns in the state and she was a pure
English descent and a very beautiful girl and much
to my happiness and pleasure she seemed to like me
very much and I certainly fell in love heavily with
her and by the time I was within about a year of
possible graduation we were talking about
marriage plans And we're seeing each other every
day after class and so on, a typical college
romance, I guess one would say. So I switched to an
English education major because I knew I could
graduate quickly and thought that I could
probably get a job. This I did. That is, I did, in
1935, graduate with an AB degree in English and a
minor in education. However, jobs weren't as
easily come by as I'd thought they were. I had taken
a job in the last six months or so while I was still a
student before graduation selling adding
machines on commission in Austin. I was walking up
and down the street trying to sell adding machines
to small commercial businesses. My machine was a
10 key machine. I believe, if I recall rightly, it
was an old Remington. In any case, I was not the
world's greatest adding machine salesman
because though I'd done all sorts of things, I was
always a little hesitant about walking into a
perfect stranger and taking up his time trying to
present a product, trying to sell things to him.
And I have never forgot some advice that the
typewriter man for the Austin firm gave some of us
juniors one time. He knew what a struggle we were
having and also how important it was to us to be able
to sell and make our commissions because we were
working on a straight commission basis. A good
commission, but commission only if you sold a
machine, of course. What he said was something
like this. He said, I know just how you young people
feel about walking into a tired, harassed
businessman and asking him for his time and trying
to sell him a machine that maybe you feel he might
not need or he can't pay for or what have you. But he
said, I want you to think about it like this. When
that man gets up in the morning, he puts on his pants
one leg at a time, just like you do. He's a human
being. You have a good product. Now, I would say
just remember this fact. We're all human. And walk
in there and present your product because you're
actually doing him a favor. If you can sell him the
product, it will pay for itself in a very short time
in his business. You're doing him a favor, you're
doing yourself a favor, and you're doing the
American economy a favor. You made a real
inspirational speech. So the next day, next
morning when I started out, the first thing I
thought of when I came to my first prospect's place
of business was about that remark about the man's
putting on his pants one leg at a time. And I could
just see him getting up and doing it. Somehow this
relieved me of a great deal of tension. And I sold
three machines that day and seemed to have very
little trouble selling the machines thereafter.
I didn't sell a great number, but I sold enough to
make enough commission to see that I would be able,
easily enough, to support myself, if necessary,
as an attic machine salesman. I did not really want
to do this, however, and just before school
started in the fall of 1935, the placement office
at university called me in and said they had heard
of an opening at Anderson, Texas, a small town, the
county seat of Grimes County. Now, I had Struggled
all summer long and back into the spring trying to
find a job teaching for that is what I wanted to do. I
must have written over a hundred letters of
application to various places in which I heard
there were openings or which the placement office
told me there were openings. But very few of these
were answered because I had no experience and many
experienced teachers were out of jobs and school
people could pick and choose. They could hire
anyone they wanted to. I even walked eight miles to
a little country school from the nearest bus. I
walked there at four o'clock and left four o'clock
in the morning and walked eight miles to the
superintendent's house thinking I would be the
first person to be interviewed for a simple
teaching job. I found five experienced people,
men with families, waiting on the porch when I got
there around six o'clock. And I was so discouraged
that I simply caught a ride with the mailman back to
the bus stop and came back to Austin. There was
obviously no chance for me to be hired. However,
this job in Anderson had come open at the very last
minute. It came about in an odd way. The young man
who had been principal there for several years had
somehow or other got on the, shall I say, the wrong
side of the high school boys whom he taught and whom
he coached. And they had thrown him out of a
second-story window of the high school, breaking
his right arm, fracturing his collarbone, and
doing a few other bits of damage to him. It was a
rather rowdy group, shall I say. And when he came to
in the Navasota Hospital, his first vow was, I'll
never go back in that school again. And he didn't.
Thus left the job open. I was told this in advance,
but of course I wanted a job desperately, and I
decided to go over and interview for the job. I will
not forget that interview. It was a rather
interesting one. It was held in a fine old farm home
built almost 100 years prior to the fall of 1935 on
the outskirts of Anderson. The home belonged to an
old gentleman named Neblett, N-E-B-L-E-T-T,
who, as I recall, was president of the school
board. And the board held its meeting to interview
me for the job and to interview one other teacher
for an elementary teaching job in his living room.
When I went in, there was the board, Mr. Neblett and
Mr. Wilson. I can remember Mr. Vic Borski and one of
the finest men who ever lived, who was the local
blacksmith and a grand person. Mr. Jennings, Dr.
Emmy Parker, another grand person. In fact, they
were all real fine people. But some of them were
outstanding to me as the years went by. Of course, I
didn't know any of these people then. They looked
very forbidding. little over 19 years old,
soaking wet, and weighed about 130 pounds. And I
had very little hope of getting the job. However, I
was encouraged somewhat to note that there were no
other applicants in the room except me and the
young lady who was to be interviewed for a grade
school position. So I was called before the board
in its wisdom. And Mr. Neblett carried on most of
the questioning. He asked me about my background,
my credentials, what I had done, my college work
and so on, whether I was married and so forth and so
on, all of which seemed to satisfy him well enough.
And then Mr. Jennings came up with the $64
question. He said something like this, well, Mr.
Kidd, your credentials are good enough, but
you're mighty small, and that's a rough bunch of
boys. Can you discipline them? I said, what? He
said, can you discipline them? I said, well, I'm
not exactly sure what you mean. If you mean, can I
whip them? I can't, obviously, neither
individually nor collectively. But I said, I can
teach them, and I don't think I'll need to
discipline them physically. I said, I have a
feeling I can get along with them very well. And he
just frowned and shook his head, and I thought,
well, there goes at least one vote. But Dr. Parker
and some of the others seemed to like what I had
said, and they asked me to go out of the room and wait
a while while they decided on my fate, whether I
should be employed or not. And I spent 15 or 20
minutes in considerable suspense and then was
called back in the room, and Mr. Neblett told me
that I was hired in a most interesting way. He said,
well, Mr. Kidd, we've decided to hire you because
we haven't got any other applicants, but I'll tell
you, you'll never make it. With this happy
thought, I accepted the job and went to Anderson.
and a rather interesting sort of job. I was to be the
principal of the high school and also the
principal of the elementary school, and combined
in one job, I was to teach mathematics, shop,
general science, and to coach basketball,
baseball, track, and tennis. I was also to assist
the secretary of the school board, and for this
work, I would be paid $80 a month on a nine-month
basis. Well, $80 a month was not bad money, really,
in those days, even for nine months, because the
apartment that I was able to rent, a small upstairs
apartment for my wife and myself, cost $10 a month,
bills paid. Eggs were something like $0.08 or
$0.10 a dozen, bread, a nickel a loaf. I had a dog,
and I could feed my dog more. good neck meat, soup
meat, fresh cut by the local butcher for a nickel a
day than we can now buy for a dollar. Things were
cheap, and the $80 proved to go a long way. I didn't
feel bad about that. I went into this job with some
degree of trepidation, not knowing what I would
find, but what I did find was four of the happiest
and most rewarding years of my life. I made
wonderful friends there I never had. I can
honestly say that I never had the slightest
trouble with any of the high school boys or the
girls. They were a serious, dedicated,
hardworking, and hard-playing bunch of young
people. They were divided into three ethnic
groups. There were Germans, Poles, and what they
referred to as Americans. The reason this ethnic
division took place was the fact that a German, a
body of Germans had settled in the community, had
established the Lutheran Church, and had a
parochial school of its own up through the seventh
grade for many years prior to the time I came there.
Also, a group of Poles had settled in the
community. They were fine farmers, and they had
established a Catholic church and had a Catholic
parochial school, also for many years prior to the
time I'd gone to Anderson. The other people were
so-called old families who referred...